feat: Editorial review: Add content for overlay and discrete animation features (#29943)
mdn/content: files/en-us/web/css/transition-behavior/index.md

## Examples

### Basic usage

```css
.card {
  transition-property: opacity, display;
  transition-duration: 0.25s;
  transition-behavior: allow-discrete;
}

.card.fade-out {
  opacity: 0;
  display: none;
}
```

### Transitioning a popover

In this example, a [popover](/en-US/docs/Web/API/Popover_API) is animated as it [transitions](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/CSS_transitions) from hidden to shown and back again.

#### HTML

The HTML contains a {{htmlelement("div")}} element declared as a popover using the [popover](/en-US/docs/Web/HTML/Global_attributes/popover) attribute, and a {{htmlelement("button")}} element designated as the popover's display control using its [popovertarget](/en-US/docs/Web/HTML/Element/button#popovertarget) attribute.

```html
<button popovertarget="mypopover">Show the popover</button>
<div popover="auto" id="mypopover">I'm a Popover! I should animate.</div>
```

#### CSS

```css hidden
html {
  font-family: Arial, Helvetica, sans-serif;
}

[popover] {
  font-size: 1.2rem;
  padding: 10px;
}
```

```css
[popover]:popover-open {
  opacity: 1;
  transform: scaleX(1);
}

[popover] {
  /* Final state of the exit animation */
  opacity: 0;
  transform: scaleX(0);

>   transition:
>     opacity 0.7s,
>     transform 0.7s,
>     overlay 0.7s allow-discrete,
>     display 0.7s allow-discrete;
>   /* Equivalent to
>   transition: all 0.7s allow-discrete; */

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  transition-property: opacity, transform, overlay, display;
  transition-duration: 0.7s;
  transition-behavior: allow-discrete; 
  /* Using the shorthand `transition` property, we would write:
    transition: 
      opacity 0.7s,
      transform 0.7s,
      overlay 0.7s allow-discrete,
      display 0.7s allow-discrete;
    or, even:
    transform: 0.7s allow-discrete;
  */
```
i have to insist that the property be used in the examples

Author: OK, thanks. I'm fine with this suggestion as we are showing the shorthand equivalents in the comment. I've mostly used your suggestion, but with a bit of tweaking to the prose; I've also fixed the ultra-compact shorthand suggestion.

transition-behavior: revert;
transition-behavior: revert-layer;
transition-behavior: unset;
```

### Values

- `allow-discrete`
  - : Transitions will be started on the element for discrete animated properties.
- `normal`
  - : Transitions will _not_ be started on the element for discrete animated properties.

## Description

When attempting to transition properties with a [discrete animation type](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/CSS_animated_properties#discrete), `transition-behavior` must be set to `allow-discrete` to enable those transitions to occur.

This is most significant in the cases of [`display`](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/display), [`content-visibility`](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/display), and [`overlay`](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/overlay), which historically were not animatable. The ability of these elements to be transitioned means that it is fairly easy to create entry and exit transitions, where an element is transitioned to and from a hidden state (which includes elements appearing in the [top layer](/en-US/docs/Glossary/Top_layer) such as [popovers](/en-US/docs/Web/API/Popover_API) or modal {{htmlelement("dialog")}} elements), or transitioned as soon as it is added to the DOM.

> 

Reviewer: This is my suggestion, but Github doesn't like nesting code in suggestions:

The `transition-behavior` property is only relevant when used in conjunction with other transition properties, notably {{cssxref("transition-property")}} and  {{cssxref("transition-duration")}}, as no transition occurs if no properties are animated over a non-zero duration of time.

```css
.card {
  transition-property: opacity, display;
  transition-duration: 0.25s;
  transition-behavior: allow-discrete;
}

.card.fade-out {
  opacity: 0;
  display: none;
}
```

The `transition-behavior` value can be included as part of a shorthand {{cssxref("transition")}} declaration. When included in the shorthand, when using or defaulting to `all` properties, the`allow-discrete` has no impact on regular animatable properties. The following CSS is equivalent to the longhand declarations above:

```css
.card {
  transition: all  0.25s allow-discrete;
}

.card.fade-out {
  opacity: 0;
  display: none;
}
```

Author: Sounds good; added, with a few tweaks.

### Discrete animation behavior

Discrete-animated properties generally flip between two values 50% through animating between the two.

There is an exception, however, which is when animating to or from `display: none` or `content-visibility: hidden`. In this case, the browser will flip between the two values so that the transitioned content is shown for the entire animation duration.

So for example:

- When animating `display` from `none` to `block` (or another visible `display` value), the value will flip to `block` at `0%` of the animation duration so it is visible throughout.
- When animating `display` from `block` (or another visible `display` value) to `none`, the value will flip to `none` at `100%` of the animation duration so it is visible throughout.

## Formal definition

{{cssinfo}}

## Formal syntax

{{CSSSyntax}}

## Examples

### Basic usage

```css
.card {
  transition-property: opacity, display;
  transition-duration: 0.25s;
  transition-behavior: allow-discrete;
}

.card.fade-out {
  opacity: 0;
  display: none;
}
```

> 

Author: Ah, I see. So you are suggesting not putting this as an example, and moving it to the description section. Yup, sounds reasonable. Done.

- `display`: Required so that the animated element is visible (set to `display: block`) throughout both the entry and exit animation. Without this, the exit animation would not be visible; in effect, the popover would just disappear.
- [`overlay`](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/overlay): Required to make sure that the removal of the element from the top layer is deferred until the animation has been completed. This doesn't make a huge difference for simple animations such as this one, but in more complex cases not doing this can result in the element being removed from the overlay too quickly, meaning the animation is not smooth or effective.

In addition, a starting state for the animation is set inside the [`@starting-style`](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/@starting-style) at-rule. This is needed to avoid unexpected behavior. By default transitions are not triggered on elements' first style updates, or when the `display` type changes from `none` to another type. `@starting-style` allows you to override that default in a specific controlled fashion. Without this, the entry animation would not occur and the popover would just appear.

#### Result

The code renders as follows:

> {{ EmbedLiveSample("Animating a popover", "100%", "200") }}

Author: fixed ;-)

## Syntax

```css
/* Keyword values */
transition-behavior: allow-discrete;
transition-behavior: normal;

/* Global values */
transition-behavior: inherit;
transition-behavior: initial;
transition-behavior: revert;
transition-behavior: revert-layer;
transition-behavior: unset;
```

### Values

- `allow-discrete`
  - : Transitions will be started on the element for discrete animated properties.
- `normal`
  - : Transitions will _not_ be started on the element for discrete animated properties.

## Formal definition

{{cssinfo}}

## Formal syntax

{{CSSSyntax}}

## Examples

### Basic usage

```css
.card {
  transition-property: opacity, display;

>   transition-duration: 0.25s, 0.25s;

Author: good point; updated

  transition-behavior: allow-discrete;
}

.card.fade-out {
  opacity: 0;
  display: none;
}
```

> See the next example for shorthand usage.

Author: deleted

### Animating a popover

> 

Author: Done! I've made it consistent with overlay, but rewritten the CSS explanation so that it explains `transition-behavior` first.

- [`overlay`](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/overlay) is added to the list of transitioned elements to make sure that the removal of the element from the top layer is deferred until the animation has been completed. This doesn't make a huge difference for simple animations such as this one, but in more complex cases not doing this can result in the element being removed from the overlay too quickly, meaning the animation is not smooth or effective.

In the transitions list, `transition-behavior: allow-discrete` is set in the shorthand for both `display` and `overlay` so that they will animate.

You'll note that we've also included a transition on the [`::backdrop`](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/::backdrop) that appears behind the popover when it opens, to provide a nice darkening animation. `[popover]:popover-open::backdrop` is needed to select the backdrop when the popover is open.

#### Result

The code renders as follows:

{{ EmbedLiveSample("Animating a popover", "100%", "200") }}

## Specifications

{{Specifications}}

## Browser compatibility

{{Compat}}

## See also

- [CSS transitions](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/CSS_transitions)
- [`overlay`](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/overlay)

> - [`@starting-style`](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/@starting-style)

Author: changed

---
title: transition-behavior
slug: Web/CSS/transition-behavior
page-type: css-property
status:
  - experimental
browser-compat: css.properties.transition-behavior
---

{{CSSRef}}{{SeeCompatTable}}

The **`transition-behavior`** [CSS](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS) property specifies whether transitions will be started for properties whose animation behavior is [discrete](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/CSS_animated_properties#discrete).

> This is most significant in the cases of [`display`](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/display), [`content-visibility`](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/display), and [`overlay`](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/overlay), the first two of which historically were not animatable. The ability of these elements to be transitioned means that it is fairly easy to create entry and exit animations, where an element is transitioned to and from a hidden state (which includes elements appearing in the [top layer](/en-US/docs/Glossary/Top_layer) such as [popovers](/en-US/docs/Web/API/Popover_API) or modal {{htmlelement("dialog")}} elements), or transitioned as soon as it is added to the DOM.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This is most significant in the cases of [`display`](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/display), [`content-visibility`](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/display), and [`overlay`](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/overlay), which historically were not animatable. The ability of these elements to be transitioned means that it is fairly easy to create entry and exit animations, where an element is transitioned to and from a hidden state (which includes elements appearing in the [top layer](/en-US/docs/Glossary/Top_layer) such as [popovers](/en-US/docs/Web/API/Popover_API) or modal {{htmlelement("dialog")}} elements), or transitioned as soon as it is added to the DOM.
```
while the original is true, the "the first two" makes it sound like historically `overlay` was animateable. overlay has no history. readers don't know that. The only way it's animateable is if tb is set, so lets lump it all together, as historically, the property didn't exist, so was not animatable, so my edit is not wrong, while making the sentence shorter and doesn't create confusion.

> This is most significant in the cases of [`display`](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/display), [`content-visibility`](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/display), and [`overlay`](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/overlay), the first two of which historically were not animatable. The ability of these elements to be transitioned means that it is fairly easy to create entry and exit animations, where an element is transitioned to and from a hidden state (which includes elements appearing in the [top layer](/en-US/docs/Glossary/Top_layer) such as [popovers](/en-US/docs/Web/API/Popover_API) or modal {{htmlelement("dialog")}} elements), or transitioned as soon as it is added to the DOM.

Author: Yup, agreed. Updated

## Syntax

```css
/* Keyword values */
transition-behavior: allow-discrete;
transition-behavior: normal;

/* Global values */
transition-behavior: inherit;
transition-behavior: initial;
transition-behavior: revert;
transition-behavior: revert-layer;
transition-behavior: unset;
```

### Values

- `allow-discrete`
  - : Transitions will be started on the element for discrete animated properties.
- `normal`
  - : Transitions will _not_ be started on the element for discrete animated properties.

## Formal definition

{{cssinfo}}

## Formal syntax

{{CSSSyntax}}

## Examples

> ### Basic usage

Reviewer: Create a description section. Include the description of discrete animation type and the basic usage in the description instead of under examples. Something like:

> Properties with discrete animations change from one property value to the next 50% of the way thru the animation as defined by the transition-duration and transition-timing functions. When normally non-animatable properties are set to `allow-discrete`, the browser instantly transitions at either the start or end of the duration. For example, when transitioning `content-visibility` from `hidden` to `visible`, the value will flip to `visible` at `0%` of the animation duration so it is visible throughout. When transitioning `display` from `grid` to `none`, the value will flip to `none` at `100%` of the duration so it is visible throughout.

Author: Good call. I have added a Description section that covers this stuff. I have moved the large paragraph from the introduction to the description section, as it seemed to fit well there.

Reviewer: move "basic usage" to the description section.

```css
.card {
  transition-property: opacity, display;
  transition-duration: 0.25s;
  transition-behavior: allow-discrete;
}

.card.fade-out {
  opacity: 0;
  display: none;
}
```

### Transitioning a popover

In this example, a [popover](/en-US/docs/Web/API/Popover_API) is animated as it [transitions](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/CSS_transitions) from hidden to shown and back again.

#### HTML

The HTML contains a {{htmlelement("div")}} element declared as a popover using the [popover](/en-US/docs/Web/HTML/Global_attributes/popover) attribute, and a {{htmlelement("button")}} element designated as the popover's display control using its [popovertarget](/en-US/docs/Web/HTML/Element/button#popovertarget) attribute.

```html
<button popovertarget="mypopover">Show the popover</button>
<div popover="auto" id="mypopover">I'm a Popover! I should animate.</div>
```

#### CSS

```css
html {
  font-family: Arial, Helvetica, sans-serif;
}

[popover]:popover-open {
  opacity: 1;
  transform: scaleX(1);
}

[popover] {

>   font-size: 1.2rem;

Reviewer: hide the html, font-size and padding.

Author: done

  padding: 10px;

  /* Final state of the exit animation */
  opacity: 0;
  transform: scaleX(0);

  transition:
    opacity 0.7s,
    transform 0.7s,
    overlay 0.7s allow-discrete,
    display 0.7s allow-discrete;
  /* Equivalent to
  transition: all 0.7s allow-discrete; */
}

/* Needs to be included after the previous [popover]:popover-open 
   rule to take effect, as the specificity is the same */
@starting-style {
  [popover]:popover-open {
    opacity: 0;
    transform: scaleX(0);
  }
}

/* Transition for the popover's backdrop */

[popover]::backdrop {
  background-color: rgb(0 0 0 / 0);

>   transition:

Reviewer: use transition-behavior. That is what this page is.

Author: The "Basic usage" example explicitly shows the usage of the longhand property. The popover example then shows realistically how you'd actually use it. I don't see a problem with how this is currently presented.

Reviewer: This is the transition-behavior page. We want to use the property that is the page topic in all the examples.

    display 0.7s allow-discrete,
    overlay 0.7s allow-discrete,
    background-color 0.7s;
  /* Equivalent to
  transition: all 0.7s allow-discrete; */
}

> [popover]:popover-open::backdrop {

Reviewer: get rid of the backdrop. Make this example simple. also, popovers should not be modal, so this is not teaching best practices. If you want to transition backdrop, use dialog as an example. Or, remove from here, and create a different example.

Author: OK, backdrop is gone.
